---
title: "Practical Memory Palaces: Consequentialism"
layout: post
---

If you look around on the internet, you'll notice a bunch of people using memory palaces for a bunch of useless crap, interspersed with wild claims about how memory palaces can revolutionize education. This gives the impression that memory palaces are for weirdos. I'd like to fix that by giving you an concrete example of my reading workflow, and how I integrate memory palaces into my normal notetaking procedure.

As a philosophy student, I read a lot of books and articles that I'd like to remember.  Just yesterday, I decided to read the [consequentialism entry](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/) on the [Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consequentialism/).  Maybe you have similar interests -- perhaps you're a science nerd or a yoga nerd or a Buddhist nerd. Hopefully you will find it easy to translate my example here to your interests. 

Consequentialism is the name given to a broad range of ethical theories that consider the **consequences** of one's actions as the basis of morality. Among professional twenty-first century philosophers, it's the most popular ethical stance. 

The article opens with an analysis of utilitarianism: The classical consequentialist theory as formulated by Bentham, Mill, and Sidgwick. It's often summarized as something like: "An action is good to the extent that it causes the greatest pleasure and the least pain for the greatest number of people."  The analysis breaks down this seemingly-simple formulation into a number of distinct claims.

After finishing the article, I noticed that this breakdown of the parts of utilitarianism was the key to understanding the rest: every section that followed considered some part of utilitarianism and how contemporary consequentialists accept, reject, or modify those parts. Knowing this list would help me to think about consequentialism in a structured way long after reading the article. Importantly, I was able to do this very quickly -- barely more time than it took to read the content once.

So, in what follows, we'll make a memory palace for the subclaims of classical utilitarianism by mentally walking through your house (or any building with many rooms that you know well) and "placing" things that remind you of the list.

1. Okay, so, mentally place yourself at the entrance to your building of choice. Visualize the door. Imagine there's a **babysitter** standing outside telling some kids about the **consequences** of their horrible misdeeds. Try and use all your senses: see him gesticulating, hear him rattling off the list of "if you do this, I'll call your mother!", etc.  Okay, that's element one on the list. It represents the obvious first part of utilitarianism: it considers consequences (as opposed to ther circumstances around the act or the "nature of the act", for instance)
2. Walk in the door. Now, imagine an **actor**, and place them somewhere obvious in the room, acting out something. I picked Keanu Reeves, and in my memory palace, he's banging on a grain silo. Again, try to use all your senses when imagining this. This actor acting reminds us of the second subclaim: that utilitarianism considers the **actual** consequences, as opposed to "forseen, forseeable, intended, or likely" ones. If you're mechanically inclined, I think an **actuator** would be a better choice for this point, since the pronunciation is more similar.
3. Pick another room or another large section of this room to go to. Place a **director** in a director's chair directing a movie (maybe starring the actor in the previous location). This reminds us that utilitarianism considers is **direct** -- it considers the consequences of the act itself as opposed to, say, the motive.
4. Again, new room/new part of room. Plop down a collossal set of boxes/safes/drawers containing all your **valuables**. Make them overflowing, of varying kinds, etc. Make sure they're valuable, and not just junk. This reminds us that utilitarianism is **evaluative** -- i.e, it considers the value of the consequences, not other "non-evaluative features." The article uses the example of a consequentialist who arbitrarily chooses "the number of goats in Texas" as the only consequences to consider for any given action.  This is absurd, and importantly, it is not a consequence that anyone (except maybe...Texan goat conservationists) conceivably values. You can stick a goat in the box of valuables if that helps you remember.
5. Next room. Place an archetypal **hedonist** somewhere -- mine is obscene, injecting themselves with various needles, holding a cup of coffee, and having sex, all at the same time. The hedonist reminds us that utilitarianism only cares about **pleasure** and **pain**, to the exclusion of all other possible valuations: that is, utilitarianism is hedonic. 
6. Next!  **OPTIMUS PRIME** is hanging out here, reminding us that utilitarianism is about **optimal** or maximal good, as opposed to merely satisfactory good. That is, it's less good for us to give a tiny portion of our money to charity than to give as much as possible (as much as will optimize our lifelong charitability, accounting for psychological burnout, for instance).
7. Onward. The entire room is littered with machine **parts**: engines, tires, tools, etc. All of them are being combined into one big machine. This reminds us that utilitarianism is interested in adding up the **parts** of the consequences into one sum (this much pain here, this much pleasure here, etc), as opposed to, say, considering each individual's pain/pleasure separately.
8. Ahoy. A cashier is in this room, **totaling** up the cost of each part being used in the previous room. This reminds us that utilitarianism considers the "total net good in the consequences", not, say, the "average net good per person".
9. Whoa. A huge floating orb is in this room, containing an entire **universe**. You can see all the galaxies and shit swimming around in it. Pretty sweet. This reminds us that utilitarianism is **universal** -- it considers the pain and pleasure of "*all* people or sentient beings."
10. Almost there. Someone has walked through here and put hundreds of those blue and yellow **equality** stickers everywhere. This reminds us that utilitarianism considers each person equally -- "benefits to one person matter *just as much* as similar benefits to any other person."
11. FINAL ROOM YAY. Weirdly, everything in the room has been painted in only **neutral** colors: browns, greys, light greens and tans. You are disturbed. This reminds us that utilitarianism is **agent-neutral**: that is, "which consequences are better...does not depend on...the perspective of the agent."

THE END! Now would be a good time to close your eyes and run through your freshly-minted memory palace once more to solidify it.

Done?

Sweet.  Now you know the various claims made by utilitarianism, and you will be able to better consider the strengths and weaknesses of it: Is agent neutrality even possible? Are pleasure and pain *really* simple enough that we can calculate with them? Etc. Ideally, if you've never heard of consequentialism or utilitarianism, you'll now have a new mental framework to consider the rightness or wrongness of your own actions/political beliefs/etc.

## Possible trouble/questions:

* **I ran out of rooms! Ahh!:** Well, you can always put more stuff in each room, or you can be creative and add an imaginary addition to your location. Or, just put a magic portal in your last available room that leads you to *another* location you know well.
* **How long will I remember this?:** It depends on how memorable you made the images, and how much you care about the subject matter. I'd say on average you'd have the information available for aweek without review. With a few reviews every now and then, it's easy to retain the material indefinitely.  My partner still remembers a weird list of random objects I helped her memorize three years ago, and she never reviews it on her own. For me, I think about ethics a lot, so I'm inclined to spontaneously review the material. If I'm memorizing something I may only think about infrequently, I make a note in a [review notebook](http://www.samuraimindonline.com/samurai-notebooks-of-the-mind/) or [Anki](https://apps.ankiweb.net) to remind myself to walk through the memory palace at a later date.
